WELSH'S
SYNTHESIZER
COOKBOOK
FRED WELSH
WELSH’S
SYNTHESIZER
COOKBOOK
By Fred Welsh
3d Edition 
Welsh’s Synthesizer Cookbook
Copyright © 2006 Fred Welsh
All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy recording or any information
storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the writer, except by a
reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review. 
Dedication
This book is dedicated to my lovely wife Danielle for all her support and for putting up
with all my late nights on the keyboards.
Many thanks to MDSP at Smartelectronix for giving permission to use Fre(a)koskope to
produce the harmonic diagrams in the book. 
CONTENTS
OSCILLATORS 1 SYNTHESIS THROUGH
 HARMONIC ANALYSIS AND
Harmonics & waveforms 1 REVERSE ENGINEERING 29

 Pulse width 7 Reverse engineering a
a patch from another
Syncing 9 synth 30

Noise 12 Reverse engineering a
 sound from a song 34
Keyboard tracking 13
 Emulating an acoustic
Polyphony 14 instrument’s harmonics
 and envelope: clarinet 39
Portamento 14

Unison 14 COOKBOOK PATCHES 47

Ring modulation 15 Instructions 47

FILTERS 16 String patches 57

Filter types 16 Woodwinds 67

Cutoff frequency 18 Brass 73

Filter slope 18 Keyboards 77

Resonance 20 Vocals 81
ENVELOPES 22 Tuned percussion 85
LFOs 24 Untuned percussion 89

Pulse-width modulation 25 Leads 95

Beat effects 26 Bass 99
Sample & hold 27 Pads 103
Sync sweeping 27 Sound Effects 109
KEYBOARD EXPRESSION 27 CALIBRATION 115
Velocity sensitivity 27 Using the CD 115

Aftertouch 27 Using sound editors, meters 119
 and by ear
 
PATCHES
STRINGS
Banjo 57
Cello 57
Double Bass 58
Dulcimer 58
Guitar, Acoustic 59
Guitar, Electric 59
Harp 60
Hurdy Gurdy 60
Kora 61
Lute 61
Mandocello 62
Mandolin 62
Riti 63
Sitar 63
Standup Bass 64
Viola 64
Violin 65
WOODWINDS
Bagpipes 67
Bass Clarinet 67
Bassoon 68
Clarinet 68
Conch Shell 69
Contrabassoon 69
Didgeridoo 70
English Horn 70
Flute 71
Oboe 71
Piccolo 72
BRASS
French Horn 73
Harmonica 73
Penny Whistle 74
Saxophone 74
Trombone 75
Trumpet 75
Tuba 76
KEYBOARDS
Accordion 77
Celeste 77
Clavichord 78
Electric Piano 78
Harpsichord 79
Organ 79
Piano 80
VOICE
Angels 81
Choir 81
Vocal, female 82
Vocal, male 82
Whistling 83
PERCUSSION, TUNED
Bell 85
Bongos 85
Conga 86
Glockenspiel 86
Marimba 87
Timpani 87
Xylophone 88
PERCUSSION, UNTUNED
Bass Drum 89
Castanets 89
Clap 90
Claves 90
Cowbell 91
Cowbell, analog 91
Cymbal 92
Side Stick 92
Snare Drum 93
Tambourine 93
Wheels of Steel 94
LEADS
Brass Section 95
Mellow 70s Lead 95
Mono Solo 96
New Age Lead 96
R&B Slide 97
Screaming Sync 97
Strings PWM 98
Trance 5th 98
BASS
Acid Bass 99
Bass of the Time Lords 99
Detroit Bass 100
Deutsche Bass 100
Digital Bass 101
Funk Bass 101
Growling Bass 102
Rez Bass 102
PADS
Android Dreams 103
Aurora 103
Celestial Wash 104
Dark City 104
Galactic Cathedral 105
Galactic Chapel 105
Portus 106
Post-Apocalyptic
 Sync Sweep 106
Terra Enceladus 107
SOUND EFFECTS
Cat 109
Digital Alarm Clock 109
Journey to the Core 110
Kazoo 110
Laser 111
Motor 111
Nerd-O-Tron 2000 112
Ocean Waves
 (with fog horn) 112
Positronic Rhythm 113
Space Attack! 113
Toad 114
Wind 114
OSCILLATORS
1
OSCILLATORS
Harmonics and oscillator waveforms
The most fundamental sound is the sine wave. Every sound whether it is natural or
synthetic is made up of sine waves.
Figure 1. All sounds, natural and
synthetic, are made up of sine waves
The sound of a sine wave could be described as extremely mellow and not particularly
interesting, but when numerous sine waves of different pitches and amplitudes are mixed
together the sonic possibilities become endless.

It is possible to create any waveform using nothing but sine waves. Let’s begin by
creating a sawtooth wave. Each sine wave is going to have a different pitch and as they
go higher in pitch they will decrease in amplitude. The first one will have the lowest
pitch and it will in fact determine the overall pitch of the sawtooth. This is called the
fundamental frequency. For the case of this example we will give it a pitch of 440 Hz
corresponding to the A4 key.
440 Hz Sine
Figure 2. A 440 Hz sine wave and a graph representing its frequency and amplitude 
OSCILLATORS
2
The bottom portion of the figure is what is called a harmonic diagram. The horizontal
axis is frequency/pitch and the vertical axis is amplitude. The spike represents the
frequency and amplitude of the 440 sine wave. Let’s add a second sine wave with a
frequency of 880 Hz (440Hz x 2).


 + =

 440 Hz 880 Hz
Figure 3. A 440 Hz sine wave added to a 880 Hz sine wave create a new waveform
Notice there is a second spike in the diagram representing the 880 Hz sine wave. Now
add a third sine wave at a frequency of 1320 Hz (440 Hz x 3)

 + + =
 440 Hz 880 Hz 1320 Hz
Figure 4. Three sine waves of frequency 440 Hz, 880 Hz, and 1320 Hz added
together create a waveform that begins to look like a sawtooth wave. 
OSCILLATORS
3
Already the new waveform is beginning to lean to one like a sawtooth wave. Keep
adding sine waves that are frequency multiples of 440 Hz and eventually a sawtooth
wave is produced.
Figure 5. A sawtooth wave and its harmonic diagram
Each one of the harmonics(spikes) in the diagrams above are called partials. The first
partial at the far left, as stated earlier, is known as the fundamental and it determines the
pitch of the waveform. The other partials are all frequency intervals of the fundamental
and they are known as overtones. Also notice that the fundamental is the loudest sine
wave of all the harmonics and that as the overtones get higher in pitch their amplitudes
decrease. There is of course nothing preventing us from mixing sine waves that all have
the same amplitude it’s just that in this particular case it is a requirement of creating a
sawtooth that the amplitudes diminish with higher frequency. Just as a point of interest if
we were to mix these harmonics all at the same amplitude it would produce something
that as successively higher-pitched sine waves are added would at first look like a
sawtooth wave with a bad complexion and as more harmonics are added would look
nothing like a sawtooth at all. Harmonic amplitudes are important!
Figure 6. Waveform produced by setting
the first 16 harmonics to equal amplitudes.
A square wave can be created using the same process. The difference is that a square
wave is only made up of odd-numbered partials. 
OSCILLATORS
4
Figure 7. A square wave has only odd partials. This square wave was produced by an actual
oscillator. Notice the slight imperfections in the waveform. No oscillator produces perfect
waveforms nor do any two oscillators produce identical waveforms.
Triangle waves are also made up of odd-numbered partials but the higher harmonics are
weaker than in a square wave.
Figure 8. A triangle wave has odd harmonics that are weaker than those of a square wave.
The process of adding sine waves together to create sounds is known as additive
synthesis. This method is used on a few digital synthesizers and soft synths and has also
been used by pipe organs for hundreds of years. In a pipe organ each pipe produces a
sine wave of a different pitch and by controlling the amount of air to each pipe it is
possible to control the individual amplitudes of each sine wave which in turn makes it
possible to produce sounds that are harmonically similar to other instruments. It could be
said that pipe organs were the first synthesizers.

Analog synthesizers use a process called subtractive synthesis which is simply additive
synthesis in reverse. Here’s some synth terminonlogy for you: Sounds created by
synthesizers are referred to as patches. This goes back to the early days of modular
synthesizers when patch cables were used to route signals from module to module to 
SYNTHESIS THROUGH HARMONIC ANALYSIS
29
essing
 of us. Fortunately home computers
are now powerful enough to perform the analysis in real-time while using only a small
percentage of the computer’s processor. The second reason is that it is generally
perceived as difficult to use. There is quite a bit of mathematical theory that goes into
computing the Fast-Fourier Transforms (FFT) on which harmonic analysis is based but as
far as using harmonic analysis as a tool for synthesis it’s rather straightforward. The
third reason, somewhat as a result of the first two, is that it simply hasn’t become part of
convention.
This is super powerful stuff and it has the potential to change the way you program
sound. Even though this section is centered on analyzing harmonics and reverse
engineering musical content it should be noted that it will also improve your ability to
create original patches as well. After you use it for a while and you come to understand
the spectral makeup of different sounds you will rely less and less on having to look at
harmonic diagrams. They’ll be in your head. This book is about analog synth
programming but it should be mentioned that harmonic analysis also makes FM synth
programming infinitely easier to understand. Don’t even bother programming FM
without it! I digress…

Before proceeding I recommend that you first get a hold of software that can perform
harmonic analysis/FFT in realtime and play around with it for a bit. Most of the more
sophisticated sound editors provide the ability to display harmonic diagrams of sound
files albeit usually not in real-time. For real-time analysis I highly recommend the
Fre(a)koscope VST plug-in. This plugin was used to create all of the harmonic diagrams
in this book. It has an excellent interface, is easy to use, and it’s free! If you don’t have a
host that supports VST plugins be sure to visit kvraudio.com where you can find a
number of hosts available for free. If you have any questions please email me at
synthcookbook@yahoo.com
The analysis/synthesis process can be broken down into three stages for each sound.
1. The most important step. Obtain a harmonic diagram of the sound that is to
be emulated or recreated. Pick the best oscillator waveforms, pitches, and
amplitudes to match the diagram.
2. High frequency harmonics are generally the last to rise in amplitude and are
the first to die back out. While comparing with the harmonic diagram of the
original source use the synth’s filter envelope to match this behavior.
3. Using a sound editor, match the synth’s envelopes to the original source.
Step one is essential while steps 2 and 3 are not always possible or required. Envelopes
may not require any visual analysis since they can be duplicated by ear with good results
more easily than harmonics. Note: The lowest-pitched harmonics are the most important.
As a general rule of thumb try to get the first 5-10 harmonics as close to their
corresponding levels in the original source.
Synthesis Through Harmonic Analysis and Reverse Engineering
The use of harmonic analysis in synthesis is nothing new, yet it has not been used much
outside of academic research and professional patch programming. There are a few
reasons for this. The first is that harmonic analysis requires a fair amount of proc
power that until recently was too expensive for most
REVERSE ENGINEERING A PATCH
30
Reverse engineering a patch from another synth:
ell a
The easiest sounds to recreate are those from other analog synths. Because analogs have
very similar feature sets it makes for higher accuracy. About ten years ago I had to s
Sequential Circuits Six-Trak but I made sure to record samples of some of my favorite
patches that I’d programmed for it. My favorite was a lead with thick unison and we’ll
begin by reverse engineering this patch. The sample of this patch can be found on the
CD.
Playing the sample through Fre(a)koscope produces the following harmonic diagram,

Figure 37. Harmoni
Circuits Six-Trak
cs of a patch originally programmed on a Sequential
t’s
etail.
Here Fre(a)koscope has been set to a linear display and a maximum window size with a
frequency range of 20 Hz – 20 kHz. The lower harmonics are the most important so le
decrease the maximum frequency of the display so that we can see these in greater d
Lower the maximum range down to about 6 kHz.
Figure 38. Six-Trak patch zoomed in to show finer detail in the lower-frequency
harmonics. The pitch of the sampled note is at C3 on the keyboard
In Fre(a)koscope it is possible to get decibel value, frequency, and equivalent key number
by clicking on a section of the graph. In the graph above the fundamental has been
selected and from the inset box at the upper right we see that the sample is tun
C3 key. We need to know this so that we kn
ed to the
ow what key to play on the synth that is 
REVERSE ENGINEERING A PATCH
31
ls in the above graph that give us a
lue as to where we should start. Notice that both even and odd harmonics are present.
w spikes that we would expect with pure sawtooths or pulses. This indicates that
ere could be some pulse-width modulation taking place or the oscillators have been set
e harmonic amplitudes do not decrease evenly from left to right. A sawtooth that has
been synced can produce harmonics that look like this but so can a pulse with variable
width. Let’s take a look at the synced sawtooth option first. Set your synth up with the
slave oscillator synced to the master oscillator and have the slave produce a sawtooth
wave while at the same time the master’s output is turned all the way down. Increase the
pitch of the slave while keeping an eye on the synth’s harmonic analysis. The closest that
we can get to the original harmonics this way is when the slave oscillator is tuned about 8
semitones above the master.
being programmed. There are many important detai
c
This rules out using a single triangle wave or square wave since they have only odd
harmonics.
The two remaining options are sawtooths and pulses since they possess both even and
odd harmonics. Also notice that the higher harmonics become broad and are not the
narro
th
to unison. We will get back to the broad harmonics in a bit but for now look at the way
th
Figure 39. A synced sawtooth oscillator tuned 8 semitones above the master
produces results similar to the original patch but not close enough

What are the notable differences between this graph and that of the original Six-Trak
sample? Of course the harmonics are all narrow and again we will get to that in a
moment but for now we only need to compare their amplitudes to the original patch. The
higher harmonics in our patch are slightly louder than those in the original. Notice that
they are higher on the graph. This can be remedied by applying some low-pass filtering
but there is a bigger discrepancy than this. Notice that the harmonics of our patch do not
undulate up and down in quite the same fashion as the original patch. It would however
be a good e
original p o would
onetheless sound very similar but we are going to try to do better. Remember this was
 guess that if we find out what is broadening the higher harmonics of th
atch and we apply it to our patch as it is right now that the tw
n
originally produced by another synthesizer so we should be able to get really close and
we can probably even nail it. 
REVERSE ENGINEERING A PATCH
32
how odd harmonics. Now very slowly begin decreasing the pulse width.
efore the width has been decreased much at all you should get harmonics that are
h
Let’s see what we can come up with using a pulse instead of a sawtooth. Again only use
one oscillator but this time do not sync it to the other. Set it up to produce a pulse. Begin
by setting the pulse width to produce a square wave. Remember that a square wave
should only s
B
identical in amplitude to those of the original patch. This happens to be at a pulse widt
of about 44%, something not much narrower than a square wave but harmonically
different. Now we haven’t yet applied any filtering so the harmonics will not diminish
quite as rapidly as those in the original patch but the levels of each harmonic relative to
their neighbors follows the same pattern as those in the original.
Figure 40. A pulse width of 44% produces harmonics that are very similar
to the original patch

Next experiment with some low-pass filtering until the level of the higher harmonics
matches those of the original. A 24 dB filter set to a cutoff frequency of 2.5 kHz
produces the following graph.
Figure 41. Apply some low-pass filtering to match the harmonic amplitudes
to those in the Six-Trak patch
There are some differences between this and the original but the amplitudes are
darn close. While two synths can produce practically the same results they cannot
produce exactly the same results.
pretty
he one last thing that we need to take care of is determining what is causing the higher
harmonics to broaden. This could either be due to pulse-width modulation or oscillator
T
47
HOW TO PROGRAM THE COOKBOOK PATCHES
scillators
Wave : Waveform choices include sawtooth, square, triangle, and pulse width
(PW). Pulse width values are given as a percentage of the waveform period. For
instance a pulse width of 50% is a square wave and a pulse width of 25% is a
pulse with a width that is half that of a square and sounds more “brassy.” Pulse
widths greater than 50% are not included as they are just inverted versions of
those between 0% and 50% and therefore sound the same. You will need to know
if your synth’s pulse-width setting goes from 0%-50% or, more commonly, 0%-
100%. If you have a synthesizer such as the ImpOscar which uses values of 50%-
10 t the value
you need to use. If the synthesizer lacks the ability to set the pulse width of the
triangle wave then use a square wave in it’s place when called for along with
slightly more low-pass filtering. Triangle and square waves sound similar
because they are both composed of odd harmonics but the higher harmonics of the
triangle are less audible.
Tune: Values are listed in octaves, itones, and cents. This is the value by
which one oscillator should be detune the other oscillator. For patches
where both oscillators have a tuning value listed it is the amount by which each
oscillator is to be detuned from a common pitch. If the tracking for oscillator 2 is
turned off this field will list the specific pitch for which oscillator 2 is to be tuned.
Mix: This is the amplitude of the oscillator. Values are given in decibels where
the maximum amplitude is 0 dB and quieter amplitudes are given as negative
values. Some synthesizers display amplitudes where the maximum amplitude is
not 0 dB. It may for instance be some positive value. In these cases just subtract
the value listed in this book from the maximum value displayed by the
synthesizer. For example if the synthesizer displays a maximum value of 13 dB
O
0% simply subtract the pulse width values in the book from 100 to ge
square wave then substitute pulse-width values 0%-30% with a sawtooth wave
and values from 30% - 50% with a square wave. If the synthesizer lacks a
sem
d from
HOW TO PROGRAM THE COOKBOOK PATCHES
48
then the oscillator should be set to a value of 6 dB. It’s not that big of a
deal just as long as you make sure the oscillators are separated by the same
e
 is
 to
yncs
oise
LFO
h,
d are sine,
 for the volume of one of the oscillators and the setting called for in this book is -
7 dB
amount. The percentage to the right of the decibel value is the percentage of the
maximum setting of the oscillator amplitude. This can be used for synthesizers
that do not display values in decibels. Since oscillators on different synths hav
amplitude adjusters with different responses this percentage is a ballpark
approximation and may require some adjustment by ear. For more accuracy it
best to calibrate the synths mix settings as explained in the last section of this
book.
Oscillator 2 tracking: This is either on or off. When on the pitch of oscillator 2
will track the keyboard. When off oscillator 2 will play the same pitch on all
keys.
Oscillator 2 sync: When on it syncs oscillator 2 to oscillator 1. You may need
check your synthesizer’s documentation to be sure which of its oscillators s
to the other when syncing is turned on.
N
Noise: White noise source set to either on or off.
Mix: Amplitude of the noise source given in decibels. The statements made
above in the section on oscillator mix apply here as well.
Routing: Sets the destination of the LFO. Destinations include amplitude, pitc
filter cutoff, and pulse width.
Wave: Waveform used by the LFO as a modulation source. Waves use
triangle, and square. 
HOW TO PROGRAM THE COOKBOOK PATCHES
49
 This
f
lide time. The amount of time that it takes for the pitch to change from
er
lators that are used. Usually 4 to 6 oscillators sound good.
ow-Pass Filter
Cutoff: Values are given for 24 dB filters and 12 dB filters. Values are given in
 If your synthesizer uses
2 dB filters. Generally,
the smaller the amount of attenuation (the decibel number) the lower the cutoff
frequency should be. With a greater amount of attenuation set the cutoff to a
equency. For example, if the listing for a 12 dB filter calls for a cutoff of
requency higher than what is listed for the 24 dB
utoff frequency is listed the percentage of the full dial
Frequency: Sets the rate of the LFO. Values are given in Hertz (Hz).
Qualitative suggestions are given in italics.
Depth: Sets the amount by which the destination is modulated by the LFO.
is given as a percent of the settings range when modulating amplitude, filter
cutoff, and pulse width. The knob/slider that controls depth would be turned hal
way for a depth of 50%. When pitch is set as the destination the depth is given in
terms of the amount of pitch that a played note will vary.
Glide: Also known as portamento. Set to either on or off
Time: G
one struck note to the next.
Unison: Set to on or off. Your synthesizer may allow you to control the numb
of oscil
Voices: The polyphony of the patch. Either set to a specific number, mono, or
multi. Multi means there is no restriction on the amount of polyphony.
L
hertz and kilohertz and go from 20 Hz to 20 KHz.
something other than a 24 dB or 12 dB filter you can figure out the required
setting by extrapolating from the given values for 24 and 1
higher fr
200 Hz then a 6 dB filter would be set to a frequency less than 200 Hz. A 36 dB
filter would be set to a cutoff f
filter value, etc.
To the right of each c
HOW TO PROGRAM THE COOKBOOK PATCHES
50
t
 rough estimate. It is based on the
 you
ngels patch on pg 33.
If it sounds more like a brass instrument than a vocal then the listed percentages
r each patch below the
. Set the cutoff for each patch above the listed
percentage value. To achieve higher accuracy on synthesizers that do not display
al is HIGHLY
recommended! If you only calibrate one parameter it should be the filter cutoff.
ven as a
ercentage where 0% applies no resonance and 100% applies the maximum
s the
Amplif
ime with values in seconds. Sustain is given as a percentage of
s maximum amount.
position. Of course each synthesizer’s filter cutoff will follow a differen
response curve so this value is provided as a
average taken from ten different synthesizers. Actual values can vary drastically.
Following these percentages will require at least some adjustment by ear. If
patch a sound and it doesn’t sound right then most likely it is due to a discrepancy
between the filter-cutoff setting percentages and the actual filter cutoff of the
synth. As a simple test I would recommend patching the A
are higher than what your synth produces. Set the cutoff fo
listed percentage value. If the angels sound like they are being smothered then the
listed percentages are too low
cutoff in hertz it is recommended to follow the calibration instructions at the end
of the book. This calibration procedure for the filter while not critic
Resonance: The amount of resonance applied to the filter. Values are gi
p
amount.

Envelope: Sets the amount by which the filter envelope controls the amount of
filtering. On some synths this is called the Initial Level setting. Again 0% i
minimum value and 100% is the maximum.
ADSR: Attack, Decay, and Release are given in terms of time with values in
seconds. Sustain is given as a percentage of its maximum amount.
ier
ADSR: The same as the envelope for the filter. Attack, Decay, and Release are
given in terms of t
it
HOW TO PROGRAM THE COOKBOOK PATCHES
51
Altern
Note ab
millisec
move th
So for e
1350 m
ate Patch Settings
Some of the patches in the book have alternate patch settings which are intended
to be used if the synth does not have the feature listed in the primary patch. For
instance let’s say that you are programming the cello patch which calls for
oscillator 1 to use a pulse with a width of 10% but your synth doesn’t have the
ability to produce a pulse. Use the alternate setting which calls for a sawtooth
wave instead.
out times: Some synthesizers list times in seconds (s) and others list times in
onds (ms). This book uses seconds but the conversion is straightforward. Simply
e decimal three places. The relation is:
1 s = 1000 ms
0.1 s= 100 ms
0.01 s = 10ms
0.001 s = 1 ms
xample 0.08 s is the same thing as 80 ms, 0.28 s is also 280 ms, and 1.35 s is
s, etc.
57
STRINGS
Banjo
Oscillator 1 LFO Low-pass filter
Wave: PW = 20% Routing: Amplitude 24db 12db
Tune: - Wave: Triangle Cutoff: 2.9khz 72% 1.5khz 63%
 Frequency: 10hz fast Resonance: 0%
Mix: -13.9db 60% Depth: 10% Envelope: 75%
Oscillator 2 Glide: - A D S R
Wave: PW = 10% time: - 0s 0.19s 0% 0.19s
Tune: +5 semi Unison: off Amplifier
 Voices: 5 A D S R
Mix: -21.5db 45% 0s 0.67s 0% 0.67s
Osc 2 Track: on
Osc 2 Sync: on
Noise: off
Mix: -
Cello
Oscillator 1 LFO Low-pass filter
Wave: PW = 10% Routing: Amplitude 24db 12db
Tune: - Wave: Sine Cutoff: 40hz 10% 40hz 10%
 Frequency: 7.5hz moderate Resonance: 0%
Mix: 0db 100% Depth: 5% Envelope: 90%
Oscillator 2 Glide: off A D S R
Wave: Square time: - 0s 3.29s 78% max
Tune: - Unison: off Amplifier
 Voices: multi A D S R
Mix: 0db 100% 0.06s max 100% 0.30s
Osc 2 Track: on
Osc 2 Sync: off
Noise: off
Alternate: Osc 1: sawtooth
Mix: - 
73
 BRASS

Oscilla LFO Low-pass filter
French Horn
tor 1
Wave = 10% : PW Routing: - 24db 12db
Tune: - Wave: - Cutoff: 40hz 10% 40hz 10%
 Frequency: - Reso nce: 20% na
Mix: 0db 100% Depth: - Envelope: 45%
Oscillator 2 Glide: off A D S R
Wave: - time: - 0.05s 5.76s 94% 0.39s
Tune: - Unison: ff o Amplifier
 Voices: ulti m A D S R
Mix: - 0s 3.9s 96% 0.93s
Osc 2 Track: -
Osc 2 Sync: -
Noise: off
lternate: Osc : sawtooth, Osc 2: gle, +2 octaves, Fiter: envelope 55%

 A 1 trian
Mix: -
Harmonica
Oscillator 1 LFO Low-pass filter
Wave: PW=2% Routing: PW osc 1 24db 12db
Tune: - Wave: Triangle Cutoff: 1.9khz 66% 1.2khz 59%
 Frequency: 1.6hz slow Resonance: 0%
Mix: -29db 30% Depth: 85% deep Envelope: 65%
Oscillator 2 Glide: off A D S R
Wave: PW=15% time: - 0.16s max 100% 0.16s
Tune: +8 semi Unison: off Amplifier
 +7 cents Voices: multi A D S R
Mix: -18db 55% 0.13s 0.33s 50% 0.14s
Osc 2 Track: on
Osc 2 Sync: on
Noise: off
Mix: - 
115
CALIBRATION
his section is tended for th se synthesizers that do not give the values of
i z, or se rs
g uch more a l ing the suggest e ngs
g i is adv t alibra at ix and fi er cutoff
en y. There are two par i ction. The first pa
rt explains how to using a sound editor and
othe tering devices. Using the CD is probably the quickest way to get ted while ing the
d o econ part will produce slightly more ac esults.
he most optim l way to use ese two section D to calibrate the
ff frequenc and if you ca record your synth into a sound editor then use Part B to
etermine oscillator mix levels, LFO frequency and ADSR values. If you would like more
larification on any part of this section please feel free to email me at fred_v_welsh@yahoo.com
art A - Using the CD
Using the sounds files on the CD is quite simple. In a nutshell you are basically just
omparing the output of your synth to each file and figuring out values such as decibels, Hz, and
onds from the filename of the sound that most closely matches what you hear from your
th.
tor Mix:
Get a piece d
. Go into the Osci lder on the CD. Al ugh the filt sn’t being
calibrated at this point it is still important to use samples that correspond to the
synth’s filter ty n older that correspo s to the filter type used by your
synth. If bo h filter type are available then you can just pick one but of course make
sure the synth is set to th t filter.
Now you should see two folders. We are going to use the Dual Sawtooth Waveforms
Dual Sawtooth Waveforms folder contains samples where both
oscillators are set to sawtooth and one is raised two octaves. Set your synthesizer up
T in o their settings
in dec bels, hert conds. By fi t calibrating such a synthesizer the patches in this book can
be pro rammed m ccurate y than us ed perc ntage setti that are
iven n italics. It isable to at he very least c te the oscill or m lt
frequ c ts to th s se rt explains how to calibrate a synth
using the sound files on the CD and the second pa
r me star us
irecti ns in the s d curate r
T a th s is probably to use the C
filter’s cuto y n
d
c
P
c
sec
syn
Oscilla
A. of paper an a pencil or pen.
B llator Mix fo tho er i
pe. Ope the f nd
t s
a
C.
folder. The 

CALIBRATION
oscillators set to sawtooth, one raised two octaves. The
116
with both purpose of this is
so that the amplitude of one oscillator can be compared to the other
D.
the
e sure to write neatly
r
ile.
G. Continue to do the same thing for each of the remaining sound files
The
ay.
ilter
ilter Type
2 dB or 24 dB variety then you can skip
A. ere
re also two files where the filter is completely open
er that is
In each one of these samples the high-pitch oscillator is left at its maximum setting.
This maximum setting corresponds to 0 dB. The name of each file indicates the
amplitude of the low-pitch oscillator. On your synth, turn the amplitude of both
sawtooths all the way up. It should now produce the same tonal characteristics as
0 dB file when you play middle C on the keyboard. Also make sure your filter is
completely open and that amplitude velocity sensitivity is off.
E. Write down the number, dial position, or whatever your synth uses that corresponds
to the maximum setting and next to it write down “0 dB.” Mak
because you are going to be using these values to patch the sounds in this book.
F. Listen to the tonal characteristics of the -5 dB file. Now lower the amplitude of you
low-pitch oscillator until it produces the same tonal characteristics as the -5 dB f
Write down the position followed by “-5 dB.”
 “Single Sawtooth Waveform” folder contains samples of a single sawtooth oscillator
which just like in the instructions above is lowered in 5 dB increments. This is just an
alternative to the Dual Sawtooth instructions above and is carried out in the exact same w
F
Determining F
If you already know whether your filter is of the 1
this section and proceed to the Determining Filter Cutoff section.
Open the “Filter” folder and then open the “Determine Filter Type” folder. Th
are four files in here. For each set (12 dB or 24 dB) there is a file where the filter
resonance is set to a pitch of 440 Hz and after about ten seconds the resonance is
turned all the way down. There a
at 20,000 Hz and resonance is set to zero. Play both of these files and you’ll notice
that the 12 dB filter produces a slightly brighter sound. That’s because a filt
“open” isn’t completely open! It will still have some effect on the tone. 
